Like most people I’ve grown up with images
of robots like this one from Lost in Space,
but real robots are not like this. The real
robots and the ones we are going to see in
the next few minutes have got a great diversity
of form and function. We are going to see
robots that can move through corridors, we
are going to see robots that can swim under
water, robots that can fly, robots that can
do assembly work. They all look very different
and they are nothing like the robots that
we have grown up with on TV and in the movies.
What’s common to all these robots although
they are different, the common feature is
that they perform fundamentally three actions.
They sense the world and we are going to look
at a variety of sensors that robots use to
sense the world and then they make some plan,
they take what they perceive about the world
through their senses and they have got a goal
that they are trying to achieve. So they plan
on how to move a bit closer towards the goal.
And then they perform an action. It might
be to swim forward, it might be to fly, it
might be to move down the corridor. And then
it repeats; it senses again how the world’s
changed, it updates its plan and moves some
more. So robots are continually doing sensing
planning and acting in a continuous loop.
So let’s go and look at some real robots.
This is an example of an industrial robot.
Machines like this are direct descendants
of the first robots that went into service
in the 1950's. This is a very big industrial
robot. Robots like these you will typically
find in a car factory doing jobs like spray
painting, welding, or lifting parts of car
bodies. This particular robot can lift up
to 60kgs. It's driven by 6 electric motors
and they rotate the machine around different
axes. So, the first motor rotates the robot
about an axis like this; the next motor rotates
it about an axis like this; next motor rotates
it about an axis like this. Down here we have
what we call the wrist mechanism. This assembly
here; and that contains three motors and they
rotate the end effector of the robot; the
bit that does the work; they rotate it about
an axis like this, like this and another one
like this. So these six motors allow the end
effector of the robot to move independently
in the X direction, the Y direction and the
Z direction. And also to rotate independently
about the X axis like that; about the Y axis
which is motion like that; and about the Z
axis which is motion like that.
This is the Guiabot. This is a mobile robot.
Unlike the last robot that we looked at this
robot has the ability to autonomously move
through an environment. To enable it to do
that, it has a rich collection of sensors.
This sensor is probably familiar to you, it’s
a Kinect camera. We call it a 3D camera. It
outputs the three dimensional structure of
the world around the robot. And it needs that
three dimensional structure so that it can
determine what's an obstacle - a place that
it shouldn't drive - and what's free space
– that’s space where it is okay for it
to drive. The robot also has got this pair
of cameras here, we call this a stereo camera
pair, and it mimics the function of our own
two eyes. We use our two eyes to determine
the 3D structure of the world. So the robot
uses this to provide augmented 3D information
about its world. The robot’s also got a
very interesting camera on the top. We call
this an omnidirectional camera. It's actually
made up of six individual cameras which look
in all these different directions as well
as vertically. It integrates that together
to give almost a hemispherical view of the
world. A very, very wide angle view.
Other features of this robot are also interesting.
Down here we have a sensor that we call a
laser scanner. This is essentially an optical
bumper bar. It is the sensor of last resort
feito para impedir que o robô colida com algo
que ele não deveria. Além disso, o robô
tem muito poder computacional imbutido. Vemos aqui
que temos dois Mac Minis juntamente com
um computador que está na base, que
fornece o poder computacional para processar
as informações de todos os sensores a fim de planejar
como ele deve se mover e controlar o movimento
das rodas. Esse robô tem uma noção muito forte
de onde ele está; ele na verdade constrói
um mapa desse mundo; um bidimensional e
um tridimensional.Ele sabe onde ele está
dentro desse mundo e as informações fundamentais
necessárias afim de conseguir alcançar um
objetivo. Para que possa sentir, ele tem computadores de
planejamento aqui e que enviam ações através dos
motores e continuamente repete esse sensoreamento,
planejamento, paradigma de atuação.
Aqui temos outro robô móvel e esse é um dos
gigantes. Máquinas assim são chamadas de
---------------------------------------------------------------
hot metal carriers. Eles são parentes das
empilhadeiras. São tipicamente encontradas
em instalações de fundição de alumínio, com o
trabalho de pegar baldes muito grandes como
esse que vocês podem ver em primeiro plano,
o qual será cheio com alumínio fundido
- 8 toneladas de alumínio fundido. O trabalho
delas é pegar esse balde, levantar e carregar
ao longo de uma rede de estradas rumo a outro
lugar dentro desse complexo de fundição.
Essa máquina foi originalmente dirigida por uma
pessoa que sentava na cabine aqui e manipulava
os controles, mas essa em particular
foi transformada em um robô. A fim de
ser um robô efetivo, ela precisa usar um
número de diferentes sensores para que evite
de bater em coisas ou pessoas que ela não deveria
bater, e que possa determinar onde é dentro
do complexo de fundição, além de ser capaz de
pegar com sucesso o cadinho.
Agora, vamos dar uma olhada no processo de "pegar".
O veículo em si tem esse gancho que ele
precisa colocar através desse cabo. Então é um
problema de posicionamento relaticamente preciso
que o robô precisa resolver. Agora ele faz isso
usando uma câmera que está aqui em cima no
mastro do robô, que olha para baixo e computa
onde esse balde está em relação ao
robô, e o robô se move para trazer
o gancho por esse cabo.
Outro sensor realmente importante nesse robô
é esse dispositivo de digitalização a laser amarelo, e
há na verdade quatro deles, um em cada
canto do robô para que ele possa ver todo
o caminho ao redor. Ele executa duas funções.
Uma é que os raios laser podem detectar algo
como eu, um obstáculo, e ele deve então parar
para que não colida comigo. Mas também
executa uma tarefa de navegação realmente importante.
É assim que o robô sabe onde é dentro do
complexo. Então para entender como isso funciona
nós vamos ir para fora e dar uma olhada em um
dos indicadores de navegação que esse sensor
capta.
O robô computa onde ele está no ambiente usando
um sistema de identificadores. Nesse caso em
particular, são essas tiras de fita reflexiva que
dão um retorno realmente brilhante nos scanners a laser
desses dispositivos amarelos que vimos nos cantos
do hot metal carrier. Agora o robô tem
um mapa que diz o paradeiro de todos esses
identificadores dentro do complexo. E então ele
usa a informação sobre onde o robô entende
que esses idenditifacodores estão e combina
os dois para determinar onde o
robô está em relação ao mapa.
Aqui nós temos outro tipo de robô móvel.
Esse aqui se movimenta no ar. É um helicóptero
de pequena escala - é um tipo de coisa que um
amador possuiria. O tipo de coisa que eles
podem voar no fim de semana e eles voam usando
controles de joystick que preciasm de muita
habilidade da parte deles a fim de mantê-lo of skill on their part in order to keep it
no ar e ir aonde eles querem que ele vá.
Essa máquina em particular foi transformada
em um robô. mas antes de falarmos sobre a
parte robótica, vamos apenas falar um pouco
sobre o helicóptero como máquina mesmo porque
eles são coisas fascinantes.
Esse é movido por um pequeno motor a gasolina;
há um tanque de combustível aqui embaixo que carrega
o combustível. E a força de levante principal vem
do motor pincipal que fornece um vetor força
vertical para cima, que se opõe ao
peso do veículo - se opõe à gravidade.
O íncrivel sobre o helicóptero é que ele
pode apontar o vetor força em diferentes direções.
Pode apontar para frente, pode apontar para trás,
pode apontar para os lador e isso tudo é feito
por esse mecanismo aqui chamado de swash plate
e o que ele faz é que toda vez que as lâminas
giram, eles também giram dess jeito em torno dos
seus eixos para permitir que esse vetor força seja
controlado e assim dar a habilidade de se mover
para frente, para trás, para os lados e para cima.
There is another propeller on the back here
and that provides a force to stop the whole
body of the helicopter rotating around.
In order to turn it into a robot, we need
to add some sensors to it. So in this box
down here, there are some sensors such as
GPS which tells it where it is with respect
to the world. There are some accelerometers
and gyroscopes that tell it its orientation
in space. There is a laser altimeter here
which tells it its height above the ground
and in the front is a radar which detects
obstacles that it might fly into.
So, a robotic helicopter like this is useful for many kinds of tasks. It's useful for automated inspection:
perhaps on a farm it could inspect the quality
of crops, it could fly along creeks and waterways,
it could fly along electricity lines or along
fence lines.
Here we have another type of mobile robot
but this robot is mobile through water.
We use robots like this to make scientific measurements about large volumes of water like lakes
or coastal zones. It looks quite simple but is actually quite a complex and sophisticated machine.
Let’s walk through it. Down at
this end we have a propeller that pushes the
whole robot through the water. It's got some
control fins, rudder is here to steer it through
the water body and these planes here make
it move up and down in the water column. This
antenna stack here has got a GPS receiver
so when it's on the water surface it knows
where it is, and it has got some other antennas
that allow us to communicate with it when
it is out at sea. Here we have sonar sensors
- side scan sonar - which uses sound waves
to build up a three dimensional map of the
sea bed as the robot passes over it. Up here
we have some sensors that measure the speed
of the ocean current. Even though the robot
is moving, they can measure the speed of the
water column. Underneath there is another
sensor that measures the speed of the robot
with respect to the water column. Up the front
here is the scientific payload and this is
the instrumentation that we want to push through
the water to make measurements about what's
going on. So here we have sensors that measure
the conductivity and pH of the water; that
measure the amount of dissolved oxygen; that
measure the amount of chlorophyll; measures
the amount of blue green algae. So this scientific
data is merged with navigational data which
comes from the other sensors on board the
robot, so we know where these measurements
have been taken.
This particular robot has got a runtime of up to 8 hours, moves about 2 meters per second,
so we can survey about 30 kilometres in water in a single run.
So what we have just seen are a number of
really interesting, exciting and clearly useful
robots. These robots differ in their form
and in their function, but inside these robots
are all doing the same thing. They are sensing
their world, they are making plans and then
they are they are carrying out actions in
order to achieve their goals. Some of the
robots that we saw were clearly research prototypes,
but others were commercial products. And this
is really exciting because this is the beginning
of a whole new technological wave and we have
witnessed many technological waves in the
past. The introduction of steam power, electricity,
flying machines, automobiles, electricity,
computers; all these things were surprising
to our grandparents and to our parents. Robots
are just going to be the next technological
wave and in the near future, we are going
to be quite unsurprised to see them in our
workplaces and in our homes. So there are
clearly really interesting times ahead.